we know that as your waist expands your
brain shrinks what yeah it's related to
Max lugavier he's the author of The New
York Times best-selling book genius
Foods a brain food expert is this the
best in the world at what he does there
is a lot of misinformation out there and
so my passion is to know what's true so
when it comes to Sugar your average
adult today is consuming 77 grams of
added sugar every single day that's
almost 20 teaspoons Jesus Christ but the
issue is we're designed to over consume
those Foods so you're fighting against
millions of years of evolution how do we
solve that I haven't gotten asked that
anywhere else so controversial new
research surrounding meat in our diet
red meat is not associated with the
health problems we've been told for
decades people will try to censor you in
talking about it but we know that animal
products in particular contain nutrients
that are very supportive of good mental
health and there have been a number of
studies that have shown that
particularly vegan diets put people at
increased risk for depression at least a
doubling of risk I mean food is so
powerful it's medicine I get passionate
about this because my mom was a
vegetarian it's clear that her low meat
diet didn't protect her there was a
period where she got really bad really
fast and then
she passed away
it was just so incredibly hard there
were times I thought about suicide it
really showed me how fragile life is we
have incredible agency to change our
destiny and to change the way really
ultimately most of us are aging today so
how do we change that
[Music]
um
foreign
[Music]
why do you do what you do and
what do you do
oh man what a place to start I um
well I do what I do because
the most important person in my life my
mother
uh
was very ill from a very young age and
that was the most traumatic seeing
seeing her go through what she went
through was the most traumatic thing
I've ever had to endure in my life and
ultimately
it led to me losing her and
when a loved one gets sick
you know had I struggled with any kind
of like health condition it probably
wouldn't have been the motivating force
in my life that um that my mom was for
me but because it was my mom because it
was somebody who uh really was such a a
beautiful person and and who aspired her
whole life to be healthy seeing her
succumb to illness it was a call to
action to me to learn as much as I
possibly could about health and
nutrition and to share that knowledge as
I was acquiring it with ultimately
anybody who would listen and so what I
do is
I consider myself a health and science
journalist with a point of view I
suppose I'm a filmmaker I'm a podcaster
I'm an author but ultimately my my
mission in life I think my purpose in
life is to
um
is to help people is to help people feel
better
live longer
live healthier and to avert ultimately
the kind
s of conditions that my mom struggled
with for so many years
zooming in on that then
can you take me to the day that you
found out your mum was sick and what was
was there a phone call was there were
you at the doctors with her and what was
the diagnosis
it was uh it was around like 2011 she
was 58 roughly at the time
and I was I had been living in Los
Angeles and my mother was home in New
York City
and I would routinely check in with my
mom on the phone and at a certain point
she started to complain to me about uh
brain fog
and I thought you know that that was
just a was par for the course of getting
older
um it's not a term that was in my
lexicon but you know brain fog you kind
of have a sense of what someone's
talking about when they when they say
that
I started to spend more and more time in
New York I was actually in between jobs
uh at the time and
because of that and because my mom's
symptoms seemed to be a little bit
worse than just like you know some some
passing phase I started going with her
to doctor's appointments and nobody
could give us answers and I'm from as I
mentioned New York City and so we have
access in New York to Cathedrals to
academic medical Insight right and so in
all of those in all of those instances I
was just met with a total lack of
clarity
and um and it was really frustrating for
me and my family you know one physician
would think that it was uh depression
for example and prescribe my mom a a non
uh you know like an SSRI drug which are
so commonly taken these days
but her symptoms continued to get worse
and ultimately we had to take a trip to
the Cleveland Clinic so in the United
States
the two I guess highest regarded
hospitals in the country are the Mayo
Clinic and the Cleveland Clinic I mean
there are probably others in that tier
as well but
um the reason why we felt the need to
travel to the Cleveland Clinic was
because they're known for taking on very
complex medical cases
and so we had a we took out a couple
nights at a Holiday Inn
across the street from a hotel and we
show up at the hospital they assemble a
team around the patient and it was there
that week that my mom was diagnosed for
the first time with a neurodegenerative
condition
the the diagnosis was unclear but she
was prescribed drugs for both
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's
disease at the same time
and so not knowing anything about either
of those conditions I mean I what I did
know about those conditions were
misconceptions
and you know some of them were for
example that their old person's
conditions that they are you know some
somehow genetically predetermined
but doing what any Millennial with a
data plan would do I went home and I sat
on the or I went back to the hotel and I
sat on the couch
um in the suite and I started Googling
Alzheimer's disease Parkinson's disease
because those were the indications for
the drugs that my mom was given
and that was the first time in my life
that I had ever had a panic attack like
I you know I felt um short of breath I
felt the room
starting to close in on me and it was uh
that was a real turning point in my life
learning that my mom had an incurable
Progressive condition
um
and uh and that was a point at which I I
really out of I mean it wasn't even a it
wasn't even a choice I just I that you
know I couldn't focus on anything else
anything but
trying to understand to the best of my
ability why this happened to my mom and
I'm not a medical doctor I didn't take
an academic route I didn't you know get
a PhD but I had always been passionate
about health and nutrition and fitness
and exercise science I actually started
college on a pre-med track and I I'm not
saying that that is a you know could
ever be a replacement for the rigors of
you know going through the academic
channels but
I knew where to find research because I
had worked as a journalist after college
and so what I did was I just immediately
dove into the medical literature and it
was really difficult to understand at
first but it's something that like you
read and you read and you read and you
cross-reference and you watch you know
you read books you watch TED Talks so
like I left no stone unturned I was like
you know I didn't I didn't like a year
that first year I wasn't even sleeping I
was just trying to like read anything I
could get my hands on
and um and then ultimately that search
broadened out where I I started reaching
out to experts like
actual scientists who are now ushering
ushering in the concept of dementia as a
preventable condition and I started
asking them questions
and so yeah that was a journey that
began about 10 years ago but it was
really motivated by by that that sort of
initial incident where my mom was first
diagnosed and
uh and it continued to
you know watching my mom decline
over the following years was really I
mean it was just so incredibly hard
that um that it just further cemented my
my mission you know to try to understand
all that I could about these conditions
Because by the time you show up to your
doctor's office
you know a lot of people ask why me
right it seems like it seems like these
diagnoses are something that like you
know that that the condition that we're
being diagnosed for
happened overnight right but it's not
like most of these conditions the kinds
of conditions that are now saddling
modern society take years if not decades
to develop and so to me what that
suggests is we have an incred we have
incredible agency to to change our
destiny and to and to change the way
really ultimately
um most of us are aging today
and uh and so yeah so I just I became
obsessed
um and uh and I still am so
so let's talk about genius Foods then
yeah
chapter three of this book you talk
about sugar
yes sugar is something I've thought a
lot about recently I'm on a bit of a
food Journey myself trying to correct a
lot of things in my diet and to be
honest I find it all absolutely like
intimidating contradictory to the point
that I'm not sure like where I'm yeah I
feel like I'm being pulled and pushed
from Pillar To Post so I'm very keen to
try and simplify
um my understanding of some of these
sort of basic nutritional Concepts
sugar
I'm going to ask you if it's good or bad
and I'm asking that because I'm a
neanderthal and I just want things you
know my a lot of my questions on this
subject matter will be very simplified
and hopefully the whoever's listening to
this at home shares an equally
primitive brain so I can be a bridge to
them but sugar
good or bad
it depends I knew you were going to say
that and I know it's a stupid question
well that's the kind of that's the kind
of answer that you should expect from
somebody who really knows what they're
talking about
the biggest problem I think today with
regard to sugar is added sugar so it's
not sugar that's naturally found in food
all plant foods have some quantity of
sugar even kale has a tiny amount of
sugar
um mostly you'll find it you'll find it
most concentrated in Fruit obviously
which is like the primary source of
naturally occurring sugar in the produce
section of the supermarket in in whole
fruit
but the most pernicious source of sugar
today is the added sugar
um the sugar that is added by food
manufacturers to ultra processed foods
usually with the intent of making those
Foods hyper palatable basically these
Foods one of the major problems with
most Ultra processed foods is that they
push your brain to a bliss Point Beyond
which self-control becomes really
difficult if not altogether impossible I
can relate yeah it's like the pint of
ice cream right we've all had that
experience of going over to the freezer
breaking out the pint of ice cream
flipping the top taking a spoonful only
intending on having that Spoonful and
then before you know it you're looking
at the bottom of the pine right I've
been there everybody I know has been
there it's just uh
the problem is that people tend to think
that it's a moral failure right that
they screwed up when they're unable to
moderate their consumption of those
kinds of foods whether it's ice cream or
cupcakes or cookies or what have you
but the issue is
the real understanding here is that it's
not a moral failure we're designed to
over consume those Foods because they
light up fireworks in our brains reward
centers because they're so calorie dense
and now we live in a time where we've
solved for the food scarcity problem
right we have food over abundance this
is the first time in human history where
there are more overweight people walking
the planet than underweight people so
we've solved that issue but our brains I
mean they're still operating on version
1.0 of the operating system that told
them that when we encountered
sweet Foods or even Savory Foods for
that matter because salt is actually a
very valuable nutrient as well that we
shouldn't stop consuming them because we
don't know when the next Feast is going
to be right it was like there were
periods of feast and famine and so our
brains and our ultimately our palates
and and our our willpower are doing
exactly what they're programmed to do so
you're fighting against Millennia you're
fighting against millions of years of
evolution when you try to moderate your
consumption of those foods and I think
that's the real problem with added sugar
we tend to over consume it we don't Tire
of eating it it gives Foods this quality
of being hyper palatable and it also has
a number of
um you know inconvenient let's just say
hormonal effects that when we really go
overboard
um you know aren't doing our health any
favors but for your average person today
I mean we live in a world where at least
here in the United States one in two
people is trending towards obesity not
just being overweight but like obese one
and two
so out of every other person you know
that person has clinical obesity and one
in two people also have some degree of
glucose dysregulation
um and glucose is essentially sugar so
for that for your average person
more than for most people
um most people today have some degree of
metabolic dysfunction the vast majority
in fact do and so for that person sugar
really is something added sugar in
particular is something that really
ought to be minimized if not altogether
avoided now a little bit here and there
it's not going to be a problem no single
food can sway your health in any One
Direction both you know either towards
health or towards disease but it's
really um I think important to be
mindful of all of the many different
places of added sugar in the in the
modern food supply
the other problem which isn't
necessarily a health problem
um but it's a it's a it's a problem with
regard to dose because as I mentioned
dose makes the poison
one of the biggest issues with added
sugar is that it's um our consumption of
it is Insidious meaning it's just hidden
everywhere
whether it's commercial bread products
or sauces or sugar sweetened coffee
drinks
we tend to just consume a ton of your
average adult today is consuming
something like 77 grams of added sugar
every single day if you want to just
like visualize that that's almost 20
teaspoons of pure sugar Jesus Christ
teaspoon 20 teaspoons of pure sugar this
is sugar
extracted from the food Matrix so this
isn't sugar and fruit this is just the
added sugar that we're consuming by way
of these uh food-like products that
Americans
and Brits and people you know
increasingly around the world in in
developed societies are over consuming
today
when I see you know
fizzy drinks that say they don't have
sugar in them
or other things that say they're
sugar-free should I be skeptical because
some some of these things I I'm like I'm
eating this this chocolate bar and I'm
thinking this is too good it says
sugar-free or like really low sugar but
it just tastes like heaven yeah that's a
great that's a great question
um and I haven't gotten asked that
anywhere else uh it's definitely worth
talking about so a lot of like
sugar-free products today
we'll use there's a number of ways to
make a product palatable
and still say that you have that there's
no added sugar so one way is
manufacturers will use a compound called
maltodextrin which is essentially sugar
it's very sweet it's technically a
complex carbohydrate so they don't have
to list it as uh as sugar
but it breaks down almost immediately
into pure glucose so it's actually a
glucose polymer so it's like molecules
of glucose bound together in a way
that's very easy for the body to break
down
um
other ways they'll add fake fibers like
chicory root fiber or tapioca starch
fiber the FDA is currently investigating
whether or not these fibers because the
whole point of fiber is that we don't uh
digest it it's something that passes
through us
maybe it gets fermented by gut
microbiota and our large intestine but
it's unclear as to whether or not
these purported fibers actually act like
fiber once in our bodies
and so
um over consumption of those fibers uh
can cause all kinds of digestive upset a
lot of people will get like incredibly
bloated like all kinds of inconvenient
digestive issues when they over consume
them and you'll see those a lot in like
sugar-free products
um then you've got artificial sweeteners
you've got other non-caloric sweeteners
like Stevia monk fruit there are sugar
alcohols which
um sugar alcohols are an umbrella
category and underneath that umbrella
you've got sugar alcohols that I think
are pretty good actually like erythritol
and Xylitol and then you have others
like maltitol and sorbitol where if you
over consume those again more digestive
upset so you just really want to be
careful with the
the non-caloric sweeteners that you're
ingesting making sure ultimately that
you're not ingesting too much
particularly of like these fake fibers
and some of the artificial or some of
the um you know the sugar alcohols
because they can really wreck your wreck
your gut
what's your personal sort of diet regime
as it relates to sugar do you do you
have sugar in your diet
um
not a ton uh to be honest I try to
minimize my consumption of
um
Ultra processed foods
which are I can Define that if you want
because it's a term that I I feel like I
use a lot these days and you know people
I I tend to use it as if everybody knows
what I'm talking about but essentially
you have unprocessed food which is like
what you'll find around the perimeter of
your Supermarket right meat fish eggs
vegetables fruit
then you have minimally processed foods
so uh ground beef for example has been
minimally processed right
um when you uh cook that beef you're
essentially processing
beef right you're processing food when
you cook it a fruit smoothie is
essentially processed fruit because
you're you're taking a few you're taking
some of the steps away
um
with regard to the assimilation process
right with a fruit smoothie you no
longer have to chew fruit you now
suddenly get to drink your fruit
um Ultra processed foods and you can do
all of those by the way in your kitchen
so that's the distinction Ultra
processed foods are foods that you
couldn't possibly make in your own
kitchen they tend to be shelf stable
they tend to so you tend to find them in
the aisles of our supermarkets they have
long shelf lives
they come in packages
they tend to have long ingredients lists
um oftentimes with ingredients that you
don't recognize so that right there is a
key you know some people listening to
this might say oh well that's a
naturalistic fallacy not everything that
we can pronounce is good for us and not
everything that we can't pronounce is
bad for us right I think that's a pretty
poor argument I actually think that
um it's reasonable in a time where 60 of
the calories
uh a person your average person is
consuming
is coming from these Ultra processed
foods and we know that people are
metabolically unwell
um and we know also that like the food
industry has lied to us so many times in
the past as they continue to put profit
over
um you know consumer health and
well-being I think it's totally
reasonable to want to know what's in
your food
um and uh and so yeah so if you can't
identify
and therefore recreate the product in
question chances are it's an ultra
processed food product
I was going to ask the question then are
all Ultra processed foods
bad
Greg Westman
um
so I would say that uh as a as a
screening tool
um Ultra process foods you generally
want to avoid them
as a
diagnostic tool
um you know our individual food products
that happen to be ultra processed
necessarily bad by virtue of their
processing not all the time and some
examples of some Ultra processed foods
that I think are actually
um quite good although again they are in
the minority
would be for example like whey protein
you couldn't make whey protein or most
of us couldn't make whey protein in our
kitchens right uh
fat free Greek plain Greek yogurt I
think is a great high protein low-cost
low calorie food you know you couldn't
generally you couldn't make that in your
kitchen like you would you know you
could if you really like wanted to put
in the the time and effort dark
chocolate is something that you know
tends to be made in a in a plant right
but um we know that there are
significant benefits to the consumption
of dark chocolate I think food
manufacturers are becoming wise to uh to
this and so now you'll find like various
high protein options that that are shelf
stable and the like and you know it
really has to be determined on a
case-by-case basis
um
but just in general Ultra processed
foods are are a big problem because they
tend to be not the best for us like the
mo the majority of ultra processed foods
that people are consuming are refined
grain products packed with added sugar
um excess sodium sodium is not bad but
like you know we tend to over consume it
today because of its presence in you
know in in uh in these Ultra processed
products
as if used as a flavor enhancer
um so yeah so most Ultra processed
products are bad and it's sort of like
the analogy that I'll draw it's sort of
like the BMI
um I don't know if you're familiar with
BMI but BMI is a way that it's a
screening tool for obesity so when you
look at the population level
um most people with a certain BMI
um past a certain level are either obese
or severely obese
um and it's a screening tool it's not a
it's not a tool that any physician would
use to diagnose obesity because you have
to look specifically at a person's body
composition you hear stories all the
time like the rock being technically
obese right that's why BMI is not a good
diagnostic tool but it is a it is a
fairly
um trustworthy screening tool so
similarly Ultra processed foods yeah
there are definitely some exceptions but
in general they're a food category to be
minimized I've been um I'm just off the
back of trying to trying to have a
ketogenic diet
I tried
for about two months yeah went well in
terms of The Superficial results I think
I was seeking
um felt great as well in terms of my
Focus my performance I just felt really
good I felt lighter I the the digestive
challenges I was having and the pains
and the bloating had completely vanished
for those two months but I couldn't
stick at it because maybe you know maybe
I have fragile willpower or something
but and then I had two guests come on my
podcast who talked about the ketogenic
diet and they both alluded to the fact
that the issue with it is your human's
ability to like stick to the thing yeah
what's your position on the ketogenic
diet and you know I know in your in your
book I think chapter 11 you talk a
little bit about
um you seem very pro-ketogenic diet yeah
I'm Pro I'm Pro the ketogenic diet in
certain contexts okay
um I'm not a pro I'm not necessarily Pro
the ketogenic diet
um in every context I you don't need to
be on a ketogenic diet for weight loss
um I think that's a big misconception
um but the reason why I talk about it
I mean you have to understand the
context
of the ketogenic diet Within
genius foods which is that from the
standpoint of the brain it's a very
important diet it's an important diet to
study it's an important diet to talk
about as I've mentioned we've been using
it to treat certain types of epilepsy
for
a hundred years at this point and that's
because it's the only diet that changes
the the biochemistry of the brain like
it does that in a very
um significant way it provides an
alternate fuel substrate to the brain
which normally relies on glucose but in
certain in certain uh situations
um the brain can't rely on glucose for
example with traumatic brain injury
or
um certainly in the setting of
Alzheimer's disease where the brain's
ability to generate ATP from glucose ATP
is the brain's primary energetic
currency
um is diminished by about 50 percent and
so you know if you're able to
essentially keep the lights on so to
speak by providing the brain with this
alternate fuel source then that's a
really uh powerful idea and needs to be
studied and there have been a number of
studies
um on you know in the setting of
Alzheimer's disease
that have shown that um at least in the
short term the ketogenic diet seems to
provide some degree of uh symptom
Improvement which I think is is is
really important now does that mean that
the ketogenic diet is going to be right
for every dementia dementia patient
certainly not because you know it's a
it's an it is an incredibly hard diet to
adhere to and particularly for somebody
with dementia I mean putting somebody
with dementia on any kind of diet
outside of the diet that they're used to
is virtually impossible right but in
Alzheimer's disease specifically
patients with Alzheimer's disease will
actually start to develop a sweet tooth
and it's thought that that's in part the
brain a response to the brain crying out
for energy because its ability to create
energy again from sugar is diminished by
50 percent
and so getting somebody you know with
dementia to adhere to that diet it's
just really difficult to do but if we
can you know if if for example the
reader of my book you know were to one
day have some kind of neurological
condition and want to experiment with
that then that's a great thing you know
we also have various uh ketogenic
Therapies
like whether it's MCT oil or powder or
these exogenous Ketone supplements
um I know people tend to roll their eyes
and think that these are like a fad now
but there's actually an FDA approved
medical food on the market for the
treatment of uh dementia called Axona
which is basically based on these medium
chain triglycerides so this is uh this
is like real science
um there's uh there's now lots of
evidence
um suggesting that ketogenic diets can
be useful in in the setting of various
types of mental illness
so yeah so that so I mean I just think
it's it's so crucially important to talk
about now does your average person need
to be on a ketogenic diet for for good
health no does the average person need
to be on a ketogenic diet to prevent
dementia no
similarly you know it's the same thing
with like a uh for for type 2 diabetes
which is now super common it's not that
sugar in the diet caused type 2 diabetes
it's the over consumption of calories
and the like and it's the overfilling I
mean we that's a whole different rabbit
hole but the overfilling of a person's
fat silos that then causes fat to
accumulate
um in other organ tissues
um and so carbohydrates are part of that
problem but does that mean that
carbohydrates caused the issue not
necessarily however for somebody with
type 2 diabetes who essentially has
gotten to a point of glucose intolerance
yeah being on a low carb diet might
actually be a good therapeutic option
it's not fixing the issue
um so to speak but that's the same I
would say that's the analogy that I
would draw to the ketogenic diet it's a
it's a powerful therapeutic diet and
um yeah and we have to we have to keep
talking about it there's a lot of
there's a lot of people that will like
you know
that will try to censor you and talking
about it
um now from the vegan camp like the the
the
you know people who who advocate for
these plant-based diets because the
ketogenic diet tends to be a diet that
is inclusive of animal products you know
in some iterations of it it might even
be in a high Animal product diet right
um but they're they they're just like
against it because it includes animal
products but if you're talking about
neurology and you're not also talking
about the ketogenic diet then you're
doing a massive disservice to uh to
patients I think around the world on
that point of vegans vegetarians vegans
one of the things you've said is that
you think they're putting themselves at
increased risk of mental health problems
and dementia because
some of the important chemicals to avert
those diseases are found in animal
products like fish and eggs and meat and
stuff like that
um is that is that Acura
yeah well certainly
um
certainly eating fish is associated with
reduced risk dementia yes yeah
um but also now we're starting to see uh
other forms of animal products like beef
chicken Dairy are associated with
reduced risk of cognitive decline
we know that animal products are the
richest source of choline
and we've seen that higher consumption
of choline is associated with reduced
risk of cognitive decline there were
just over the past year there have been
a number of really uh important studies
generally observational in nature that's
kind of one of the uh issues with
nutrition science it's really we we have
very few long-term you know randomized
controlled trials to to show us with
certainty that these connections are
causal but the UK biobank study which is
a very large population 500 000 people
um observational study found that uh
a dose response meaning the more
um I believe uh
animal products were consumed the lower
the risk of dementia and Alzheimer's
Disease by a pretty significant margin
we see that red meat is not associated
um with the kinds of health problems
that you know we've been told for
decades cancer and stuff and yeah I mean
it's dietary quality as a whole there
was a great study people can look up
maximova is the first author I believe
the the year it was published was 2017
or 2018
they looked at all cause cancer and they
found that when people were eating meat
on a low quality diet meaning meat in
the context of fast food right that yeah
there wasn't increased risk for cancer
but one once diet quality was high
meaning that people's people were eating
meat with fresh fruits and vegetables
clearly a dietary pattern indicative of
Health Consciousness that that risk of
cancer was completely abolished
um so yeah like you know early on in in
nutrition I think
it was you know with with poor quality
studies
um sponsored by people that have a dog
in the fight yeah exactly it's it's very
easy to zoom out at the population level
and to see links drawn between
meat consumption and
anything bad imaginable right because
most of the time first of all most
people people who consume more meat
especially in this country tend to be
more sedentary and they tend to smoke
more they tend to this is the whole
concept of healthy user bias which is so
crucially important you have to know if
you intend to know anything about
nutrition you have to know about healthy
user bias
people who eat more red meat they tend
to smoke more they tend to be more
sedentary you know they tend to eat more
fast food like most meat products
consumed in this country are hamburgers
they're chicken nuggets you know like
they're like they're those kinds of
foods Ultra processed meat products
conversely if you look at the
consumption of fresh fruits and
vegetables you see healthy user bias
there too favoring fresh fruits and
vegetables and that's you know it's
pretty obvious to understand why most
people today are like obese they're
consuming Ultra processed foods day and
night fast food shelf stable convenience
Foods the kinds of foods that you Foods
in quotes that you would get from like a
vending machine for example those are
like that's those are the foods that are
like the base of most people's food
pyramids so to speak
and so if you were to take a food like
quinoa for example which first of all if
you know how to pronounce quinoa you're
probably reading Health blogs right
you've probably listened to a health
podcaster too right consumption of
quinoa is probably Associated I don't I
don't know if this study has been done
but I would bet I would bet 500 today
that consumption of quinoa is associated
with robust health is it because the
quinoa is so healthy or is because the
person that's eating quinoa on a regular
basis that person probably a pretty
health conscious person that person
probably shops at Whole Foods that
person is probably has a gym membership
you know so that's healthy user buys
right there
and so it works um in the inverse sort
of way with red meat there are very few
health conscious like red meat eaters I
mean there are more now but we're like
sort of a niche you know like where
people on the paleo diet so to speak uh
most people who consume red meat yeah
they're eating it in the form of hot
dogs and hamburgers and Subway
sandwiches with the fries with the large
Coke so all that is to say is that it's
very easy to find like links and that's
why there's this funny
truism in like nutrition science is that
if you look in the nutrition literature
you can find a study to back up anything
that you want to say I'm always hyper
conscious of that
um but that's certainly the case with me
because you know these observational
studies they just they they're so
difficult to do but now newer studies
are showing us that when you control for
these kinds of things like Diet quality
that there's no association you know
that there's that that meat actually is
a very nutritious food
um and with the small uh slew of
randomized controlled trials that we
have with regard to red meat we see no
negative impact with regard to an actual
like real clinical outcome and
oftentimes we see benefit because it's a
pristine wonderful source of protein
It's a Wonderful source of many
micronutrients that we know are people
tend to under consume today nutrients of
of concern so to speak like zinc vitamin
B12 nutrients that we know that people
directly need iron iron deficiency
anemia is a real Global problem one in
four people globally are anemic in half
of those cases are due to iron
deficiency and red meat is like the
ultimate iron supplement you know
so yeah so I get passionate about this I
think in part because my mom was a
vegetarian and um there were many times
as I was uh you know reading about all
this stuff
that
um I wanted to like shake my mom and be
like you know Mom you're you're you're
letting your ideology impact your
biology you know that's like not
something that you want to happen
and um
and you know I would never go so far as
to say that I know what caused my mom's
illness like you know I I don't even
know if it was her lack of consuming
meat I don't know but um it's clear that
her you know low meat diet
um didn't didn't protect her you know
and I'm pretty convinced at this point
that um
that sum is certainly better than none
you know it doesn't I don't I don't
Advocate I think some people think that
I advocate for a high meat diet or even
like a carnivore diet I don't I just I
really think it's an important
um part of a balanced diet
um and uh and a highly nutritious part
of a diet it's actually like red meat
and animal products in general they they
tend to be our most nutrient-dense Foods
there was a paper by um Ty Beale who's a
nutrition researcher whose work I follow
um that found that if you looked at the
top six or so
most nutrient dense foods available to
us they're all animal products with the
exception of maybe uh dark leafy greens
which are also very nutrient dense so
yeah I'm pretty um Unapologetic in my my
endorsement of um of animal products
yeah you in um speaking of dark leafy
greens and animal products and such in
um in your book in on page three engine
one you talk about clearing out your
kitchen now I'm I'm well aware when I
asked this question that if you if you
were clearing out my kitchen you'd first
throughout all of the ultra processed
foods
probably maybe yeah I mean I would want
you to do whatever's in my best interest
I'd be yeah I'd be gentle okay next all
sources of Wheat and gluten is the point
number two yeah all sources of gluten
um
that's all my bread gone yeah well my
noodles are gonna go as well
I think that my my stance has has
softened a little bit since I wrote that
I like the Savage let's keep it moving
yes
um sources of industrial grade
emulsifiers what is an industrial grade
emulsifier and why is it got to go yeah
so specifically um in the book we call
out polysorbate 80 and
carboxymethylcellulose which are uh
synthetic emulsifiers that are used to
create pleasing mouth fuels in Foods
usually combined that that combine
hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances
so oil and water or fatty substances and
more aqueous solution and so the you
know the the archetypes of those Foods
would be nut milks and ice creams
and what they've shown in animal models
to be clear salad dressings and stuff as
well yeah yeah salad dressings
um what they've shown in animal models
is that those substances
um degrade the mucosa this like really
important lining that separates the
inner contents of our GI tract from the
uh from the up our gut epithelial cells
um which you know there's a a chapter in
genius foods that I'm very proud of on
the gut microbiome all the new science
surrounding the gut microbiome and how
you know the gut brain axis really in
many ways influences not just brain
function but might have an effect on our
predilection to disease
and so anything that inflames the gut
the gut isn't like Vegas like what
happens in the gut doesn't necessarily
stay in the gut and so these two
compounds were shown
um in animal models to uh have a
profound inflammatory effect
um on the on the gut
and so I recommend uh looking out for
them and avoiding them now they're also
a
sort of a proxy or surrogate if you will
for Ultra processed foods like Ultra
processed foods are going to have those
two compounds in them
um as opposed to Fresh Foods so
the dose makes the poison
um but uh but yeah I would recommend uh
avoiding them because that study was
like pretty
pretty eye-opening
um and The Chronic the consumption of
those two uh compounds I would say
probably worth
um
you know avoiding I'm looking at this
list of stuff that you you've asked me
to check out my kitchen and there's a
lot of things here that are currently in
my kitchen beverages fruit juice been a
big fruit juice Drinker my whole life
when I was younger they told me that
[__] they told me that orange juice
was healthy I was guzzling orange juice
thinking I was doing my body a a huge
service and doing so and then over time
I've come to learn from having
conversations like this that these fruit
juices I thought when I had a fruit when
I had like a fruit smoothie I thought I
was like you know I was paying homage to
my body but I've come to learn that I
was probably doing my body a disservice
in many respects because of the the
sugar the available sugar yeah I mean
you can squeeze the fruit sugar from
five six oranges in one glass of orange
juice I mean think about it the last
time you like ate a whole Apple did you
feel afterwards that you wanted to go
and eat another Apple
no I mean I only ever eat one apple at a
time there you go right yeah well I
think the reason for that is probably
that whole fruit is self-limiting
because it kills you a bit more than it
fills you a bit more yeah first of all
you're eating it there's a speed at
which you're eating it that's a lot
slower than when you drink the fruit
juice so it takes a lot you know it it
allows your body or stomach to realize
that it's it now has food in it to turn
off some of those hunger signals like
the hormone growing you also when you
chew it you know you leave large
particles of the Apple that might take
you know an hour to to fully digest
um the food Matrix has fiber in it like
the fiber from that Apple so it slows
the the transit of
um that Sugar it slows that it blunts
basically the blood sugar Spike
um you're also getting lots of water
along with the you know the the sugar
that you're consuming when you consume
that Apple it's a lot different when
you're just drinking juice you know it's
a lot easier to like to get the fruit
sugar from you know if you're drinking
apple juice for example you can easily
drink the ju the sugar of five six
apples in one glass but you know after
eating a delicious even the most
delicious Honeycrisp apple which I love
it's like one of one of my favorite
foods I've never felt the need to go and
try another one another one the way that
when I'm eating tortilla chips you know
while I'm chewing on one tortilla chip
I'm already you know lusting after the
one that's in my hands right I'm not
even like focused on the one that's in
my mouth
and so why is that I'm like that with so
many foods like if I have one Pringle I
there's it's going to take a lot to stop
me getting to the bottom yeah and I
don't know why it's like suddenly I
become a pringle addict and I've always
wondered why that is because you know
brussels sprouts broccoli you know
I have one I have two I have three okay
we're done yeah but the Pringles I can
I'll get to the bottom unless I'm in a
social situation where I feel slightly
embarrassed by eating an entire like
tube of Pringles
well they're I mean it's Pringles once
you pop you can't stop that is a that is
a truism with scientific backing like
that we know that Pringles are Ultra
processed we know that they're minimally
satiating
there are three characteristics that
make a food satiating and Pringles lack
all of them so one is protein protein is
the most satiating of the macronutrients
So for anybody struggling with hunger
pangs or whatever prioritize protein in
your diet increase the amount of protein
that you're consuming for a person with
healthy kidneys there is absolutely
nothing to worry about with regard to
high protein consumption
it's the most satiating macronutrient
and it is a really important
macronutrient for nourishing or
musculature and ultimately yes washing
our hunger like when you eat more
protein you eat less carbs and fat and
carbs and fat are energy protein is it's
very difficult for your body to store
protein your body doesn't
your body doesn't want a storm there's
so many uses for protein in your body
whether it's to create neurotransmitters
or to rebuild your muscle tissue or your
bones or ligaments like to create
enzymes I mean protein like there's
protein has so many roles in the body
carbs and fat for the most part are Just
Energy I mean there's no such thing as
an essential carbohydrate that's not to
say that carbohydrates are bad by the
way because a lot of people will hear
that and say oh I don't I could you know
get by on zero carbohydrates
carbohydrates are important for
optimizing hormones for optimizing
exercise performance but there's no such
thing as an essential carbohydrate it's
essentially energy
and so too is fat I mean fat is energy
as well
um we have a minimal daily requirement
for essential fats
um and we see that higher fat can
support
um energy you know as I mentioned you
don't want to go low fat because fat
supports hormone production we see the
people on low-fat diets tend to have
lower testosterone it also facilitates
the absorption of very important fat
soluble
um
nutrients like vitamins AED and K and
various fat soluble plant compounds but
it's carbohydrates
and fat that our energy very easily
stored
um by the body you know if we uh we can
easily store carbohydrates in our liver
as sugar glycogen
um and in our musculature and we can
easily store fat
um in in fat so protein very difficult
to store uh so that's the other that's
that's the first factor that makes a
food satiating Pringles are a low
protein food the second factor is fiber
Pringles are devoid of largely devoid of
fiber fiber slows you know like we saw
in the in the Apple example it slows the
transit of food in the stomach it makes
us feel more satiated it also absorbs
water and it mechanically stretches out
the stomach which turns off
um
certain hunger hormones like ghrelin for
example is it good for weight loss yeah
it's good for weight loss to prioritize
protein and fiber dietary fiber and then
um water so water is the number one
enemy of shelf stability and so Ultra
processed foods they want long shelf
lives that's like key to a profitable
Ultra processed food product right it
can be shipped overseas it can stay for
months on the Shelf
very little waste
and uh and so products like uh Pringles
devoid of what they're completely
dehydrated right and water sometimes
when we're hungry we're actually thirsty
it's just that those wires are getting
sort of crossed and miscommunicated but
your average hunter-gatherer didn't have
access to
you know running water they couldn't
just pop into their local like gas
station and buy bottled water you know
where did uh hunter-gather find water
when it wasn't uh readily available
um they would get it from food they
would get it from fruits and vegetables
and even animal products are a good
source of hydration so oftentimes when
we're when we think that we're hungry we
just need a little bit of hydration so
all those three factors the protein the
fiber and the and the hydration
are all like severely lacking in
Pringles and other Ultra processed foods
not to call out specifically yeah
um yeah but uh these kinds of foods that
we Now consume to our detriment today in
the 21st century would have potentially
saved the life of a hunter-gatherer one
of our ancestors back prior to the
ubiquity of food stability
so yeah not to hate on your on your
Pringles addiction no it's fine they're
out ladies and gentlemen I am so excited
um to introduce and to announce that we
have a brand new sponsor on this podcast
and it's a brand that I've used for the
last decade
um across business across personal life
when I'm holidaying when I'm traveling
for works even at times when I haven't
had somewhere to live and that is Airbnb
the thing with Airbnb is most people
when they think about Airbnb they think
about the guest side of the the product
they think about staying somewhere and
scrolling through all of the incredible
homes that you can stay in but the
entrepreneur in me has always thought
about the other side which is what space
do I have what space am I living in that
I could add from a supply side and to
create a revenue stream from that's what
I'm fascinated by and I'll be sharing
details about that side of Airbnb in the
coming episodes thank you Airbnb for
supporting us on this show means a lot
reading through your your work was the
first time I encountered this
distinction between Health span and
lifespan in your own assessment like
what is the just difference between
someone's Health span and their lifespan
great question so we're I mean today we
are living longer right thanks to Modern
medical advances
not all of us my mom you know my mom
didn't have a a lengthy lifespan but
generally we're living longer but we are
also dying longer and what I mean by
that is that we're spending our health
spans are shrinking so our lifespans are
expanding
but we're actually spending more of our
life especially particularly in our
latter years sick
burdened with with chronic disease and
disability
and so I think it's really important
that we not just have
um a lengthening lengthening of lifespan
in our crosshairs but that we also
aspire to lengthen our health spans so
we want to we want to prevent chronic
disease and disability to the best of
our ability
and I think that's that's just crucially
important so what that implies is as we
age you know that we we continue to be
mobile and to move about the world and
to be free of depression and we stay
connected in our in our communities
and I think you know eating a healthy
diet exercising staying socially
connected I mean you know averting
loneliness uh these are all
crucially crucially important and um
and yeah unfortunately today I think we
tend to think only in terms of lifespan
I just want to live as long as possible
but um you know today for many people
particularly in the western world
it's you know it's like uh it's a
double-edged sword because yeah you're
living longer but you're you know most
most people in Elder age today are frail
you know they have chronic chronic
health conditions
um
and uh and it's a big problem
you mentioned depression there
um I've I've been learning a little bit
lately about the role that our diet
plays in our mental health
um you you referenced earlier that your
mother was given antidepressants yes her
eyes when she was going through her her
period of ill health
what's your what's your assessment on
the role that food plays in mental
health what foods are typically in your
view good for our Mental Health
helping us to avoid depression anxiety
whatever else and what foods are
typically bad for our mental health oh
man yeah mental health is so I I learned
this recently which is just shocking
that um the number two cause of death
for people between the ages of
uh 15 and 35
in that sort of ballpark demographic the
second cause of death is uh suicide
and that's just shocking to me the first
is unintentional injury so it's like
drunk driving and just you know doing
stupid things
but yeah when it comes to mental health
I mean our our
mental status is highly responsive to
the outside
to our to our environment and our
environment includes how we're living
Our Lives the people that we surround
ourselves with on a daily basis and
indeed the foods that we're eating so
you know I think when it comes to mental
health there are a number of really
interesting observational studies that
show us that vegan and vegetarian diets
but I think particularly vegan diets are
put people at increased risk for
depression
by the latest data that I've seen at
least a doubling of risk now the
question that always arises there is is
the vegan dietary pattern causing the
depression or are people who are more
prone to depression gravitating to the
vegan diet I think it's probably
bi-directional because we know that
animal products in particular contain
nutrients that are that seem to be very
supportive of good mental health
um there was one study out of deakin
University's food and mood Center that
found that women who didn't consume the
nationally recommended three to four
servings of red meat per week were at
twice the risk of developing major
depression and they didn't see that
Association for other animal
proteins so they didn't say for chicken
and pork and they also saw an increased
risk when people when women ate much
more than the than that three to four
serving recommendation
um and when you actually look into what
red meat contains in it
um it contains a lot of nutrients that
we know directly support the brain
whether it's zinc or vitamin B12
you could look at a food like beef liver
which is one of the best sources of
folate we know that low folate
consumption is associated with
depression
um so I think that's you know I think
animal products super important eggs you
know a rich source of choline
um fatty fish but generally like Whole
Foods I think Whole Foods
a whole food dietary pattern so you know
minimally processed again like the foods
that you find around the perimeter of
the supermarket that you cook for
yourself Mediterranean diets
Mediterranean Salt yeah I Don't Care
What proportion of animal products or
plant products you know you have
although I think including both to some
degree
um is probably better than not
uh provided you're not allergic or or
have any specific sensitivity but um
they're now using diet as an
intervention to improve symptoms so the
same food and mood Center which is
actually one of the institutions that's
really
um that's really kind of championing
this field of nutritional psychiatry
published the first ever randomized
controlled trial where they used a
dietary intervention to treat depression
major depression
so it was called the smiles trial and
anybody can look this up but they used a
a Whole Foods diet Mediterranean style
diet that was inclusive of red meat fish
dark leafy greens berries olive oil eggs
things like that and they found that um
in the patients with major depression
compared to controls that were treated
with the standard of care
they saw they saw something like a
three-fold increase in remission from
the dietary intervention now these were
patients obviously that or or I guess
not obviously but they were patients
that were on a junk food diet right so
if you're on a junk food diet
um which most people are and you're
seeing you know and your mood is not
where you think it ought to be I
absolutely think a first line of defense
should be
you know adopting more of these or
integrating rather more of these um
these these Whole Foods and cutting out
the ultra processed foods and then of
course I mean like sort of uh you can't
really talk about
um lifestyle and mental health without
mentioning exercise exercises you know I
mean there's like a bounty of evidence
at this point showing us that exercise
is like literally medicine for the brain
soon is something you talked about as
well soon as being
having a positive impact on cognitive
function
I believe the chemical is called
norepinephrine norepinephrine yeah
that's what I said or uh I believe on
your side of the pond it's called
noradrenaline it's the same you're
adrenaline okay yeah it's the same same
compound and that has a cognitive
relationship that has a relationship
with cognitive performance yeah so
norepine norepinephrine is actually
produced in a part of the brain called
the locus ceruleus which is like one of
the first structures to
become damaged in Alzheimer's disease
and so that's sort of like the Hub of
norepinephrine release and we see that
when we apply
um physical stress to the body of which
saunas are one type
um that there is a an up regulation of
norepinephrine release and
um and yeah so that might in a way sort
of help uh you know Prime the body to to
adapt and become more resilient because
that's essentially what stressors do to
the body that's the whole concept
underlying hormesis that hormesis which
is like low doses of
low to moderate doses of a stressor
actually are as opposed to being rather
than being than being harmful to the
body actually elicit an Adaptive
response that makes the body
um come out on the other side stronger
and more resilient and so that is the um
that's essentially the mechanism
um the proposed mechanism underlying why
it seems that saunas are beneficial to
our health
and but also exercise and also cold
water immersion and also
um intermittent fasting and also even
some of these like plant compounds you
know like we we consume Myriad uh
compounds and plants that if we were to
consume big doses might actually have a
Toxic effect but in small doses actually
are thought to benefit our health via
this same hormetic pathway but yeah
sauna use a lot of the research is
coming out of the University of Eastern
Finland
which is a a great place for This
research to be done because saunas in
Finland are like taking a shower so you
could say if that study were done if
those studies were being done here in
the United States you could easily write
them off to healthy user bias because
somebody who's regularly saunaing
is um or taking Asana as the Finn say is
probably has access to a gym probably
you know is going to the spa regularly
probably is like putting a great deal of
attention on their own physical health
right but in Finland that's not the case
people aren't doing saunas as like a
health modality they do it because they
love it because it's a self to the you
know to the cold temperatures there and
it's just a part of like the normal like
routine and so what they're finding is
that
um you just using Asana two to three
times a week is associated with a 22
risk reduction for dementia and using it
four to seven times per week is
associated with a 65 reduced risk for
the development of dementia so that's
like a dose response the more you use it
the more robust the health effect seems
to be and it's not just for dementia
they've seen a reduced risk for
hypertension which we know is really
important we know that the brain that
blood pressure is really important from
the standpoint of brain health so you
want to make sure that your blood
pressure is healthy also um
all cause mortality now just to be clear
these are these are still correlational
studies but mechanistically there is
plausibility there and that is you know
we know that
when you use Asana it does have a
positive impact on your blood pressure
we know that it can reduce inflammation
we know that it gets your heart rate up
I mean I know this when I whenever I use
this on I put my finger on the artery in
my wrist and I can see that I'm getting
like almost like a mild aerobic workout
and so we know that that's like that's
saunas are essentially like the best
workout that you can have while sitting
absolutely still you're also purging
toxins through your
um through your sweat
compounds that aren't as
um as effectively excreted via stool in
urine so it's like you know there's
there's a lot of good stuff going for
saunas and of course more research needs
to be done
um but all indicators seem to point
towards a a positive Health effect it's
really interesting that um you know our
ancestors probably had natural stresses
on them at all times and we've kind of
built a life around mitigating stresses
so you know living in very warm like
room temperature
houses sat on sofas use this piece of
glass to order my food my date
to talk to my friends it's almost like
with we're optimizing our lives away
from stresses and these stresses seem to
be so critical to the natural hormone
and physiological responses that make us
healthy human beings totally yeah it's
like I've heard it referred to as like
the Comfort crisis yeah yeah it's it's a
it's a big problem whether it's like
constant you know constant climate
control
um so I mean just like so few of us are
willing at any point to venture out of
our comfort zone and to be uncomfortable
and I think our biology suffers as a
result this isn't just
um you know this is like there's actual
now basic science underpinning this
concept that when we apply stress to the
body
or even via the foods that we consume
this like mild hormetic stress than we
get that we get from certain compounds
whether those compounds are in turmeric
or kale or broccoli or what have you
that
um
what doesn't kill us makes us stronger
and it Fosters a degree of
anti-fragility
which um I love you know I think it's
like I think it's so important I mean if
you think about it we didn't evolve over
Millennia to arrive here and be taken
down by a peanut you know or like or all
of these like you know we're seeing this
this crazy Inc uh
like spike in in autoimmunity in
incidence of autoimmune conditions and
allergies and the like and you know I
think it's a it's a testament to how
disregulated our lifestyles have become
how removed our lifestyles have become
from the kinds from from the world in
which we evolved
and um
and part of what's been lost is the
stress is the beneficial stress as
you've mentioned what is the
unbeneficial stress and the impact it
has I you know chapter 10 you talk a lot
about about chronic stress
one of the one of the things you said
was
um
ever see a person with a bulging
midsection but surprisingly skinny arms
and legs this is the picture of chronic
stress yeah chronic stress is a killer
it I mean we evolved to
see a threat
have a stress response respond to that
threat and then go back to our Baseline
level of functioning right today our
stressors come not from physical threat
right from the lion on the Savannah
that's running towards us or towards our
progeny
um where the the stress that we that
most of us experience today
it's a new breed of stress it's from you
know it's from work it's from it's from
chronic consumption of the news media
it's from being stuck in relationships
that have gone sour working jobs that we
hate
Financial stress I mean there's all
different kinds of stress and not all of
that stress is avoidable just to be
clear I mean when I was going through
what I went through with my mom I
couldn't avoid that stress but what did
I do
as a as a way to cope because I couldn't
avoid it I built up my own resilience
and we see that
um you know whether it's exercise or
these hormetic stressors that we were
talking about that you actually can by
exposing your body to physical stress
you can bolster a degree of
psychological stress there's what's
called a spillover effect
um and and a cross-adaptation effect
that occurs
but chronic stress I mean one of the
problems is that it's like it's
sustained and it causes a change in our
hormonal milieu that suppresses immune
function
it
um causes our adipocytes so our fat
cells to release pro-inflammatory
compounds
um pro-inflammatory cytokines it causes
this you know chronic release of the
hormone cortisol which is not a bad
hormone by any means but you know that
can over time have a negative effect on
um brain function on on memory function
it impairs digestion when we're
chronically stressed and we know that
um you know the gut is crucially
important when it comes to modulating
inflammation in our bodies helping us to
assimilate nutrients from the foods that
we're consuming and if you're
chronically stressed you're just not
doing that as well also people who are
chronically stressed I mean they have
digestive symptoms right as a result
whether it's like diarrhea bloating like
I mean this is people like before public
speaking they often see a
um they often have like digestive
symptoms right that just goes to show
you how intricately connected like our
our perception of of a of a of of like
you know stress and how that can affect
our biology
um and so that example that I gave in
the book
about that apple shaped torso one of the
most harmful places to store fat um in
the body is in our midsection so that
apple shaped body that is attributable
to an excess of visceral fat and this is
fat that essentially hugs our internal
organs and is particularly
pro-inflammatory so it secretes as I
mentioned we know our that our fat is an
endocrine organ which is essentially an
organ that secretes hormones
um it's not just an inert storage site
and
those fat cells have
um I believe uh four times the cortisol
receptors as compared to regular
run-of-the-mill subcutaneous fat that
you store in your like you know
underneath your arms and you know on
your thighs and we know that visceral
fat is
um associated with dramatically you know
worse cardiovascular health increased
risk of cardiovascular events we know
that as your waist expands your brain
shrinks yeah well it's it's probably
related to
cortisol because we know that cortisol
causes that when cortisol is chronically
elevated and particularly when we're we
then self-medicate with these Ultra
processed foods foods that are high in
sugar right which we all reach for when
we're stressed out right to emotional
like to to soothe ourselves right with
food
we tend to store fat
um there like in the midsection so
it's not that stress uh causes us to
store more fat necessarily I mean fat
storage is largely regulated by energy
balance but what it can do is dictate
where we store that fat and as I've
mentioned it's the storage of fat in our
midsection that's particularly dangerous
and so um
and so yes so that that the effect that
cortisol can have there it also it has a
negative effect on other tissues
um it can have a negative effect on our
um total brain volume as we've seen in
some studies
um
just to be where does Cortisol come from
our adrenal glands adrenal glands yeah
and there's certain foods that stimulate
the production of cortisol more than
others not Foods
um it's just it's stress you know and
there are certain conditions that are
associated with um
hypercortisonemia
um but um but no food it's not food that
I would it's not the foods Foods
actually can like bring down cortisol
you know so some people like like sugar
like sugary foods like you know like a
lot of people
um anecdotally at least will uh see an
improvement in their sleep when they
consume a little bit of like honey
before bed for example because that can
sort of bring down cortisol right if
they hadn't if they pre you know for
example skip dinner or had they they had
an earlier dinner or they had a
particularly like low carb dinner or
maybe they're in like a calorie deficit
um so that can all cause cortisol to
kind of inch its way up
and um and carbohydrates are good at
sort of like
pumping the break on on cortisol release
that's one of the reasons why we tend to
reach four sugary Foods when we
experience chronic stress so it's like
this vicious cycle right but the way to
pump the brakes on cortisol release is
not to like just keep eating sugary
Foods it's to find and uproot the cause
of the stress you know get out of the
job that you hate break up with the
person who's driving you crazy on a
chronic basis you mentioned honey though
and sleep
um something again I've been thinking a
lot about ever since I bought myself a
whoop
um which tracks my sleep and gives me
some data in the morning about how I
slept is how to improve my sleep via my
diet
um what advice would you give me there
if I wanted to have deeper
deeper uh more quality sleep what should
I be eating not eating avoiding what
times
Etc yeah I mean generally you just you
want to not eat too close to bedtime
[Music]
um there's sort of like a Goldilocks
Zone where you know I think we're met as
diurnal creatures meaning creatures that
are that typically eat during the day
you want to eat your last meal about two
to three hours before you go to sleep
you don't want to go to bed hungry I
mean people people obviously have
different
um
you know different preferences and I
think preference in many ways uh Reigns
supreme but what we know from circadian
biology is that we're meant to eat about
two to three hours before we go to sleep
and um
and you don't you know like that's to
give space between your last meal and
sleep because sleep is a time for
rebuilding and restoring we see this
like interesting hormonal shift in the
body that is really like it's why sleep
is you know we rejuvenate in many ways
like our bodies our cells our tissues
when sleeping
part of like how we get there is a
change in body temperature
and you know we see this like this this
dip in body temperature right before we
go to sleep
um or just after actually we we go to
sleep if you eat a like a really like
meat heavy meal right before you go to
sleep
um a lot of people notice that doing
that can negatively impair sleep and I
think one of the one of the proposed
mechanisms why that happens
is that
we have the thermic effect of protein is
quite High
particularly compared to fat and
carbohydrates and so you've got this
like internal furnace like burning in
your gut like to try to break down and
assimilate all of the precious amino
acids that you've just ingested and so I
think that can sometimes be at odds with
um with like that wind down process that
circadian you know wind down process so
yeah just I would try not to eat too
close to bedtime many people
um feel like eating carbs before bed
does help them sleep for that same
reason like maybe they have cortisol you
know still like
[Music]
um
you know a bit of of cortisol
dysregulation and carbs before bed uh
seems to seems to be able to help with
that
um what do you when do you eat if if not
before bed like you know sometimes I've
been guilty of eating while I'm falling
asleep this is old Steve not new Steve
um but when do you eat you talked about
intermittent fasting I read some things
that said you start eating roughly at
like 11 o'clock in the morning
yeah what's the window in which you you
eat I generally will yeah I don't I
generally won't have my first like food
until
um these days it's about 10 30 10 30 uh
11 in the morning I've been
experimenting with um
carbohydrates before exercise for a long
time I was I really enjoyed fasted
workouts
and um
and lately I've been experimenting to
see what a little bit of Perry workout
carbohydrate does for my for my lifts
because I'm really into I love Fitness
so
um so I've been kind of experimenting a
bit with that but the general rule of
thumb that I practice is that I don't
eat for an hour to an hour and a half
after I wake up part of the reason for
that
is and again just to like preference you
know
personal preference is uh is really like
key here so you know a lot of the like
recommendations that I'll make like you
might see a smidgen of benefit but at
the end of the day like if you can't you
know
work out at the optimal time or you know
eat in the optimal Windows like you know
still what you eat and making sure that
you are getting exercise is better than
like not because of like a fear that
you're not doing it you know optimally
like work exercise is crucially
important eating a Whole Foods you know
animal inclusive plant inclusive diet I
think optimal
um but you know what circadian biology
is is showing us is that
when you eat immediately after waking up
um you know you might not have had your
melatonin for example uh fully subside
which is a sleep hormone when melatonin
is elevated as it starts to um you know
it starts to rise once the sun begins to
set that sends the signal to our bodies
essentially that the kitchen is closing
that the kitchen is closing and that you
know we're now approaching the time
where you know we're gonna change the
guard it's like a Changing of the Guard
essentially where we're going to focus
on Rejuvenation and repair
um when people wake up in the morning
that hormone hasn't fully necessarily
subsided yet and that can have the um
consequence of making us not as insulin
sensitive so it might impair glucose
regulation
um while it's still elevated and um
and so like eating carbohydrates in that
window particularly like as they
typically appear in the standard
American diet the bran muffin the glass
of orange juice like that's I don't
think uh you know like an appropriate
breakfast for that time of day you know
I mean you might be able to get by with
something like that later on but
generally like
after you wake up you want your
melatonin to fully subside
and also cortisol which is your body's
you know we talked about that as a
stress hormone cortisol is not bad it's
also your body's Chief waking hormone
that's the highest that it's going to be
throughout the day in the morning and I
mentioned that cortisol is catabolic
well one of the reasons why cortisol
like one of the effects that cortisol
has is it helps to liberate stored fuels
in the body whether it's you know sugar
stored in your liver or even fat you
know people tend to wake up
in a fat burning State and so I like to
just give my body like an hour and a
half to like let the my hormonal U adapt
and get ready for like for food do you
go outside
yeah as almost immediately after I wake
up I like open my blinds so I have like
a really big window it allows like light
to come in
you really want that Morning Light
um it's crucially important I uh I've
been a fan of um Sachin Panda his work
for a long time he's a
circadian biologist down at Salk the
Salk Institute
um and um and he's published a lot of
great research actually I think he
helped to uh uh discover the melanopsin
proteins in the eye that interface
directly with this region in the brain
it's called the suprachiasmatic nucleus
so it's it's like it's like a switch
gets set when we expose our eyes to
Bright Morning Light
that essentially starts a 24-hour timer
that influences our energy levels our
alertness our coordination our body
temperature and then at the end of the
day when we are you know like when we
start to feel sleepy and when that sort
of
diurnal or nocturnal rather melatonin
um
curve begins to pick up so yeah like
setting setting your circadian rhythm
first thing in the morning with with
bright light exposure is super important
even on a on an overcast day the ambient
light
is more than enough to
um to flip that switch so yeah that's a
crew that's crucially important my
morning routine is essentially like I
wake up I open my blinds I get like I
make sure that I'm whether it's like you
know checking my phone or whatever it is
emails like by the window so that I get
that nice ambient bright light to Anchor
my body's circadian clock
um and then generally like I wait uh an
hour
and I'll have like morning coffee and
then that's you know when I'll like eat
something these days you know it'll be a
mixed meal with like protein and
carbohydrates and that's when I I will
typically hit the hit the gym soon after
that I've been asking everybody you just
mentioned coffee that I've been asking
everybody this question to try and
figure out someone can uh give me a a
new answer but
you know coffee seems like this kind of
miracle drug because everybody can point
to the upsides of having coffee in the
morning whatever but nobody has been
able to really articulate to me the cost
and all these things in life have a cost
right we live in a society now where
many people will have multiple cups of
coffee before 12 o'clock before midday
and nobody seems to be able to tell me
what the cost of that is so there must
be one because nothing in life is free
yeah so so what is the cost Well
everybody's different so you know people
metabolize some people are slow caffeine
metabolizers others are are not
um and so you know you have to you
really have to like determine for
yourself whether or not coffee is
something that
works well for your body it is a type of
stress I will say that so for people who
are chronically stressed adding coffee
to the mix
is probably uh you know just adding fuel
to that fire and it's not that I want
you to get rid of the coffee I'd rather
see you get to the root cause of where
that stress is coming from
um but you know it can stimulate
cortisol release and it's it is uh it is
a powerful stimulant we know that it can
also negatively impact sleep
it actually affects your brain similarly
to Bright Light
so that's why you know I mean for many
reasons you want to make sure that
you're you you are consuming it
um you know far far away from your from
bedtime but it it it honestly is hard to
find
um a downside to Coffee I mean there
really is good there is good research on
it recently it was discovered
that the caffeine in coffee
acts like a natural pcsk9 inhibitor so I
know that's like an unfamiliar it's like
a mouthful but there's a new class of um
I think relatively uh you know benign
cholesterol lowering drugs on the market
called pcsk9 Inhibitors now I'm not
anti-cholesterol or anything like this
some of our most healthful Foods
actually act like natural Pcs pcsk9
inhibitors dietary fiber in a way is
like a pcsk9 inhibitor
but they found that high dose caffeine
actually
um
at about a dose of about 400 milligrams
uh can actually act like this drug where
it makes your liver more effective at
recycling
cholesterol carrying lipoproteins like
LDL and so that that kind of like adds a
mechanism to the observation that we've
seen that people who regularly drink
coffee
uh seem to be protected against
cardiovascular disease and even
neurologic conditions like Alzheimer's
disease Parkinson's and Ms so it there
seems to be this this protective effect
of coffee but it's always important to
caveat these findings with the fact that
these are averages so an average coffee
seems protective but certainly within
those those cohorts that are being
studied some people are doing really
poorly with coffee as well so you just
you know it's it's something that you
really have to like
regularly take inventory and ask
yourself like is this working you know
for me I think one of the healthier ways
to ingest coffee is to not consume it
immediately after waking up which you
know I'm guilty of doing many days but
like you know it's it's generally
something that's like you're better off
consuming like an hour or two after you
wake up
um and again not you know not too late
into the afternoon
um either and and like also you know the
dose I think is really important
um people that develop caffeine
dependency you know they think that
they're they're improving their
performance with caffeine but what
they're really doing is they're treating
their withdrawal from caffeine so
another way that I like to kind of
um make sure that I'm consuming it in
the most mindful way possible is I'll
take like occasional uh weeks off from
caffeinated coffee and I'll switch to
decaf
um yeah and it's I feel like it sort of
helps like re-sensitize my brain breaks
the dependency a little bit and then I
bring it back and when you bring it back
man you see
what a drug you know what a potent drug
coffee really is you know
but in general I'm a fan I'm a fan of of
coffee everything is in polyphenols it
um it's a natural activator of our
body's Nrf2 pathway which is like a
detoxifying pathway in the body that's
also stimulated by cruciferous
vegetables nobody can say anything bad
about coffee it's like everybody's part
of the conglomerate and everyone's got
like an affiliate link or they're on
payroll or something but yeah so it's
actually it's actually changed my
perspective because I just assumed that
anything that was such a such a powerful
stimulant must have a real significant
downside but I've asked a million people
this question not a million but this is
maybe six people this question some of
which have written books about coffee
and I'm still yet to hear a compelling
argument against having coffee in and
amongst your diet as you say
um a few hours after you wake up
so one of the things that really did
catch me off guard was it was in your um
your book The Genius life where you talk
about this study with the mice and you
make the case that travel is a has
positive relationships with health it
has health benefits
not something I've ever heard anybody
say before that travel is good for our
health yeah wow I'm glad you brought
that up
um
because this is this that also kind of
parlays into another concept that I've
been lately thinking about
um a lot for the first time well first
of all so the study that I talk about in
the second book The Genius life is the
fact that they you know the just how
important novel experiences are for the
brain they will take mice and keep them
confined to you know like a very a
limited area and they see that they
suffer they suffer in terms of their
bodies and their brains and then they
let that Mouse
or they let um you know intervention
mice go and explore what they call
enriched environments and they see
something like four-fold
um you know like they see like a an up
regulation in various indicators of
neurogenesis which is really important
it's like the creation of new brain
cells so all that is to say like you
know it's important to do novel things
and as I say this you know this is
something that I struggle with in my in
my in my own life because I am a
creature of habit and I would routinely
get the sense this gnawing sense that
I'm living Groundhog Day over and over
and over again where I I wake up and I
do a few things like work related I work
out but ultimately like I've got like
this routine that I love and I tend to
do that on script every day
but I started to get this feeling like
I'm just like waking up doing a few
things going back to bed waking up doing
a few things going back to bed like
before I know it like I'm my head is
just like on My Pillow again and it's it
it started to get like really
frustrating to me until I discovered
that Groundhog Day syndrome is actually
a thing
and um essentially what it is is you
know our brains are and this ties back
to the mouse study our brains are
efficiency machines right it's
conservation of energy our brains and
bodies don't want to do any more work
than they absolutely have to right
because I mean now we know that food is
like ever present always at Arm's Reach
but for the longest time that wasn't the
case and our brains are massive energy
consumers our brains
speak for 25 percent of our basal
metabolic rate despite accounting for
only two to three percent of our body's
Mass so anything that the brain can do
to make its functioning more efficient
it'll do so when you do the same things
every single day
what does your brain do it prunes away
excitement joy happiness like the
dopamine response is just completely
blunted and that's why as you get older
people
universally right is like a human
Universal people report that time just
accelerates right like where did the
last decade of my life go it's not the
time accelerated right it's just that
your life has become so routine
it's interesting you say that because
there's also the other stereotype that
you get grumpy yeah the word
yeah
it's quite typical in The Stereotype
that people will get older and a little
bit more grumpy
yeah well they get grumpy they get stuck
in their ways they get I mean yeah
that's that's definitely the case but
they probably are getting grumpy because
their lives lack the joy and excitement
that they once felt right time is just
like accelerating that moving walkway
that we are all on towards the
inevitable decrepitude of old age right
like it seems to go faster and faster
and faster the older we get but it's not
because time actually
is moving any faster it's because we get
so stuck in our ways like we get so our
routines become so cemented and what we
fail to realize and hopefully this you
know me saying this like shakes people
out of their out of their comfort zones
you know and and inspires people to
shake things up a little bit this
Groundhog Day syndrome it causes our
brains to just like
sheer away for the sake of efficiency I
mean it's got It's it's got good
intentions right but it shears away like
all the joy so you just become like this
rote automaton and and the joy the
excitement it's just you know it's
something that like
you cease to experience you know you
cease to experience it whereas when you
look back at like your youth for example
it's not that like time actually moved
slower it's that every day was different
and um and so that I think is is really
important and uh and yeah we should
challenge ourselves whether it's to
travel I mean travel is like to me the
epitome of
exposing oneself to an enriched
environment because everything is new
but if you can't travel you know like
go to a different gym every once in a
while look you know try shopping in news
in different supermarkets or change up
your wardrobe or take on a new creative
project like start a new hobby there are
all kinds of things that you could do to
shake yourself out of this like
Perpetual routine that I think has a
real cognitive and health cost
so I I was looking at a study
um they did on rats and habits you
probably know the study with the rats
the chocolate and the maize
I think so where they get the the rats
to run through a maze to a piece of
chocolate but the first time the rat
runs through the maze to the chocolate
they they monitor the rat's brain and
there's a ton of cognitive cognitive
activity right you you see the rat
observationally scratching around
sniffing around
um eventually it finds the chocolate
against the reward when they put the
wrap back into the maze for the second
time
cognitive activity is gone because the
Habit has been formed so that as they as
I looked at the brain scans of those
rats it was just completely flat because
they were on autopilot again the brain
is yeah conserving its need to function
so that it can focus on other things
other threats it can conserve energy as
you say
um
and that's what our lives become like we
don't when we get out of bed in the
morning I'll root from the bed to the
kitchen is not one that requires me to
have any sort of cognitive
um activation I fly and therefore also I
don't remember the journey yeah I just I
just fly down there yeah you're on
autopilot yeah and our lives become
autopilot and it's interesting I'm
trying to figure out as you were talking
there like you said sharing away the
like the happiness what why why does
being on autopilot cost me happiness and
why does it make my did you say it made
my brain smaller not smaller okay thank
you well it probably I mean you know if
if that Mouse study holds true in humans
it probably doesn't
um it doesn't
support neuroplasticity yeah yeah
there's no need for my brain to yeah
yeah I mean it's a it's an efficiency
machine after all so the happiness point
now why why does that why does living a
life on autopilot have an impact on my
on my happiness well there there are
probably I mean there there are
definitely benefits to routine right
like there are not to like some of the
benefits to routine is like are can be
that you you know you have your for
example your your diet dialed in or you
have a you know you have great
connections in your community you know
so I'm not telling everybody to like
throw their lives into into upheaval
but
um but you know it's just like when we
start to do the same things every day we
we it's the scientific term is
habituation yeah yeah we habituate right
it becomes habit right and we feel this
way like we we see this with that car
that we've pined for and suddenly it's
sitting in our driveway and yeah it's
exciting for the first month or two
months or three months but after a
certain point you know that that level
of excitement that we once felt towards
that car or maybe even it's if it's
maybe sometimes it's the person that
we're sharing our beds with you know
like this is just an inevitability an
unfortunate inevitability of The Human
Condition
and so I think there are ways to hack it
I think there are ways to you know
travel with your with your significant
other or break the routine with your
significant other
um or you know invest in things
um that have emotional value for you for
example so I mean the car might have not
been the best example because like some
people do have emotional connections
with cars like I bought a guitar you
know recently that I love and I have an
emotional connection to it because it
was played by one of my favorite artists
you know
um so are you talking about that really
it's the decline of meaning that is
associated with habituation yeah and
that makes us unhappy because as you
know creatures of meaning we do need
things to remain meaningful in our lives
yeah it's it's like it's the it's these
like rote routine behaviors that are not
all that
um productive or meaningful
um those are you know it's like driving
the same route to work every day
shopping in the same Supermarket every
day eating the same foods every day like
challenge your your preferences you know
like there are foods today that I enjoy
that I didn't like 15 years ago and I'm
always willing to challenge like my own
preferences about things but it's like
when you do the same things every day
um you tend to start to overlook them
it's it's it's difficult if not
impossible to maintain an appreciative
relationship with something that's
always there
it's funny it reminded me of a study I
am I was reading about
regarding music and how there's almost
an optimal point with a song that we
love where it can be repeated over and
over again so say if we're listening to
it on the radio
it's repeated say we listen to it 50
times there's a point where we've heard
it so many times and it's become
habituated that we love it at an optimal
level and then it declines when we we've
heard it too much because it loses that
sense of meaning and I just remember
reflecting on that how the record
industry
um want to put things in our lives that
have a certain level of familiarity but
not too much familiarity because then
we'll dislike it this is why they do
remixes because there's a level of
familiarity there so we like it but it
has that novel nature which we also
really value to to make us interested
yeah which habituation obviously kills
like habituation and novelness are
inversely correct you know yeah no it's
true it's um there's this quote that I
love I'm a huge uh James Bond fan we're
talking a little bit about like you know
before before we started rolling but
like in the latest film there's this
wonderful Jack London quote at the end
of the film that they uh that they use
to to kind of
um commemorate Bond and the quote is
something like I shall not waste my days
trying to prolong them I shall use my
time and I I love that line so much and
I think it's such a it's such a good
um
you know like it's it's so emblematic
for I think the life that we all deserve
you know that we all ought to be living
I think like it's occasionally in this
conversation about how do we live longer
like that's a Nuance that gets lost you
know it's not just about living longer
it's about living more fully and um and
so yeah I think that that's like that's
part of it you know it's like breaking
the routine and and like getting back
some of that joy and excitement that we
have about life you know maybe after
listening to this it'll be you know
going to the supermarket and loading up
on healthful food you know blueberries
and and avocado and dark leafy greens
and grass-fed beef
um things like that or maybe signing up
for a new gym membership and sustaining
that because of what you now know it
does for mental health exercise so it's
it's it's a balancing act as you as you
kind of alluded to earlier on between
familiarity Community Comforts and those
kinds of things but keeping your foot
one one step outside of your zone of
comfort so you have the like stimulation
and the joy and the spontaneity of Life
at the same time and that's like a
constant subjective balancing act that
we're all trying to you know like where
I like my Comforts but there is you know
as you say the Comfort crisis I can get
a little bit too comfort and that'll
have adverse effects on a lot of things
yeah and that's one of the things that I
challenge with in this life is like I
love my routine and I love comfort and I
love you know but I also
um I love travel I just don't I'm not
good at planning travel and I you know
have all these like hang ups in my not
what if I'm not able to like find a gym
that I want to go to in this new place
or find a healthy you know Supermarket
or something to shop at like these are
all the things that I my neurotic brain
is like okay we maybe we should just
stay put you know but um but whenever I
do whenever I get like pushed to to do
those kinds of things like to travel I I
never regret it you know
you said something earlier when you're
talking about habituation about the
person lying next to you in bed yeah
that was a brave thing to say yeah well
I'm uh I'm you know maybe that's why I'm
single I don't know I uh I
think that that's a common human
um struggle you know and I've struggled
that with I've struggled with that in
relationships
um in the past and it's a it's a
getting bored of someone
um
yeah just like not necessarily getting
bored but like
taking what's always around for granted
I think that happens to all of us it's a
big problem it's a big
sad unfortunate
awful thing that our brains do you know
like it's there's an evolutionary reason
for it and again it's it's conservation
of energy
um so you know like it's not um
I think like it occurs for a for an
Adaptive purpose but I think it's it's
one of these things that
can become malignant if we're not like
aware of of it and um and we don't
actually take uh like make an effort in
our lives to to challenge it to
challenge that tendency that we all have
you know so I'm not I'm not I didn't
like I'm not endorsing that I'm not
saying that there is any
um you know
reduction in value for somebody for
somebody or something that we're that
you know that we are like that's that's
always around that's not that's
certainly not the case
um but yeah it's it's a constant fight
it's a constant battle you know I think
everybody everybody experiences this are
you um hoping to find one person and
settle down with them for the rest of
your life
I am yeah I don't I mean I cross your
arms though
what in my body language look like a
shield oh man yeah well I've been in
I've had a therapist like for the past
year and a half and I'm trying to like
um yeah like you know kind of like
unravel some of my own like you know
early childhood like
drama that you know that like I think
has led to a more avoidant attachment
style and has you know given me
challenges with like with regard to
commitment and things like that in
relationships
um
and uh
and yeah but I'm also very lucky in the
sense that like I feel like I have a
very rich life like I have a very close
family I've got a great community of
friends I I love what I do for work
um thankfully I feel very fulfilled by
um by my work and so it's not like it's
not like a major priority for me but I
yeah I would like to like
you know like
be in a I do want to call that in like
that is like something that is a is a
goal for me but
um
but yeah we all have like our
our our stuff you know and I feel like
for me it's like one of the
I was um incredibly close to my mom like
that was like a you know we talked about
that I was incredibly close to my mom I
loved my mom it was so hard to see what
you went through and and that was an
incredibly traumatic
um
experience you know but uh
but that kind of like attachment that I
have had from childhood to my mom you
know it's made it like difficult and you
know some of the things that I witnessed
in their relationship my mom's
relationship with my dad and their
marriage and how how bad that was at
times some of the things that I saw
um it didn't really
set me up uh you know to like have the
easiest time
um in relationships but uh but yeah I'm
like working through it I think therapy
is wonderful I mean you know I've had a
great therapist I'm doing all the work
I'm like reading all the books and
things like that have you been able to
identify because I can relate to many
things you said about like learning the
model of love as being a
imprisoning one or a toxic one or an
unsafe thing like learning from from our
parents at a young age that like love is
unsafe it is violent or it is this or
whatever have you been able to identify
through therapy what you're sort of
limiting beliefs are as it relates to
like love and relationships have you
gotten that
oh man
um
I
yeah I mean that I'm
I think the limiting yeah the limiting
beliefs that like you know
that you can't have the kind of
relationship that you want that you
don't you know maybe deserve the
relationship that you want
I mean this is a totally different like
rabbit hole but for me you know like
one of the one of the things that I
learned about in therapy
is that when you're really
my mom
divulged things about my parents
relationship to me that she you know
probably shouldn't have at a at a young
age my mom was the best mom
just to be clear
but
nobody's perfect and we all make
mistakes and I think that like
she probably shared some stuff with me
about her relationship that she
shouldn't have at the age that I was
essentially making her making me
a surrogate partner back when she didn't
have the emotional shoulder of my dad
you know when my dad was
um not being the best partner to my mom
and um
there's a term for it the term sounds
worse than it is but the term is covert
incest so it's not it's not sexual but
it's like they make you their emotional
partner in a way when when they
shouldn't
um and that's something that like at the
time you feel like you're getting you're
receiving really privileged information
you're like your mom's confiding in you
you know and that's how I felt when I
was like growing up
um and yeah she was an emotionally
she didn't really have support from my
dad and it was it was sad looking back
you know I'm not blaming her or anything
um her her mother was kind of a cold
woman also so she you know she like
unloaded some stuff on me when I was a
child frequently actually and and so
that like you know it created like a
very strong attachment to her but it has
kind of like disallowed me at least this
is like and I don't want this to become
a limiting belief for me but like the
insight
that I think has been like
helpful to just like kind of understand
where my patterns come from is that
that's created a difficulty for me
attaching emotionally to like other you
know other like women and I've I've I'm
getting like better I've gotten better
you know but it's uh
it's just a very fascinating thing
because we tend to think about like
childhood trauma as being like Big T
trauma like I was sexually abused or
something like that which you know I had
a wonderful childhood I never would have
used the t word to describe anything
that happened to me in my childhood but
then there's like nobody escapes
childhood social injury-free we all have
trauma whether it's like we're not
picked up at the right time or we're you
know ignored at the wrong time or or
what have you and so
um we all we you know nobody escapes
childhood trauma free is what I've
learned and so
those traumas they have it's like a
butterfly effect they have a way of
creeping out you know in in ways that
are not often obvious when we're adults
an effect and they affect our
relationships and sometimes profound
ways and so you know for me like why you
know I'm I feel like in in many ways I'm
a very sensitive guy I'm I'm I'm you
know I I relate to women I love you know
women I've had relationships with women
where is this like this this disconnect
and I also had a relationship with one
woman for a very long time it was an on
and off again relationship and I loved
her
um and the feeling was Mutual but I
wasn't able to commit to her
and so you know it's it kind of inspired
this like journey of Investigation like
where you know if I've got like
everything seemingly so figured out how
come I don't have that figured out like
where's the where's the deficit coming
from you know like what's the where's
the nutrient like deficit you know with
regard to like my relationships and um
and yeah so maybe I mean that's it you
know I saw a really brilliant therapist
and I highly recommend for men you know
and women for everybody everybody should
like go see therapy it's been really
helpful the key I guess is to not let
that become like this Perpetual like
limiting thing and to continue to do the
work and to like unravel and to keep
peeling back the layers of the onion all
super helpful we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest also a question for the next guest
not knowing who they're asking it for
and the question that has been left for
you is this is quite an interesting one
I actually really like this question
because it's
it's very interesting and Slightly
bizarre
um but I love it
if you could summarize your journey so
far in life into one I am affirmation
what would it be and why
whoa so a previous guest came up with
that question for me 100 they didn't
know that it was for you yeah but they
left it knowing that it was for the next
guest whoa
[Music]
um
I am love how hippy is that
I feel like everything I do is really
out of love
and uh
so
that is how
I would answer that even though it
sounds so hippy that it also kind of
makes me throw up a little inside where
does that come from
it's I don't know
it's a little too
like
that sensation it's it feels so
if it feels too self-aggrandizing and
I'm not that way you know like I'm uh
I I feel like I'm you know I can be
self-deprecating like to a fault you
know like I I
like
the fact that like anybody pays
attention to my work you know it's like
it's such a gift to me I'm so grateful
for it you know
[Music]
um
but
everything I do like out of out of
love like you know I started doing this
out of the love that I had for my mom it
continues
both for the love that I I have for her
but also for the love for what I'm doing
and for the research and how much I love
nutrition science as well as for how
much I love generally people and how
much I want to see people thrive and
um
and so yeah it really has been a
a powerful compass for me you know as I
navigate this crazy thing called life
love really has been a you know it's
been a it's been a really
uh
it's been a really
um reliable North Star
you know for me
Max thank you thank you so much you've
taught me so much but um your story is
is is incredible and you know
I have absolutely no doubt not only that
you know your mum got to see you on that
show but also that she is just a [__]
insanely proud of you insanely proud of
you for for everything you've done for
all the people you've helped with these
New York Times best-selling books
um but it's not just it's not just it's
not just the information you're sharing
it's it's how you share it not I'm not
at least in an engaging way not at least
because you're so you seem to be so
incredibly humble but um there's a real
sincerity behind your message that I
having sat here a lot you know a long
time having spoken to a lot of people
don't always see but I see that at the
very heart of you and to be fair someone
that didn't qualify in terms of getting
like a medical degree or whatever would
have to be driven by a pretty deep
sincere sense of curiosity and Mission
to go as far as you have and to sound
way more
articulate and educated on subject
matter that people with great academic
backgrounds in the field have so thank
you and you know I I have a real sense
that you're just at the start of your
journey wow I really do mean that I
really feel like you're just at the
start oh man and that's just a testament
of how far you're clearly going to go so
yeah thank you for your time thank you
for being here and thank you for the
generosity of everything you've shared
thank you Stephen Phil you're a brother
at this point it tends to happen when I
have conversations with people here
thank you brother thank you Max
quick word from one of our sponsors I've
got a tip for all of you that will make
your virtual meeting experiences I think
10 times better
as some of you may know by now Blue
Jeans by Verizon offers seamless high
quality video conferencing but the
reason why I use blue jeans versus other
video conferencing tools is because of
immersion their tools make you feel more
connected to the employees or customers
you're trying to engage with and now
they're launching one of their biggest
feature enhancements to impact virtual
events so far called Blue Jean Studio I
actually used it the other day I did a
virtual event using the studio which I
think about 700 of you came to TV level
production quality all done by one
person with very little technical
experience on a laptop so if you've got
an event coming up and you're thinking
about doing it virtually check out blue
jean studio now let me know what you
think because I genuinely believe I know
this is an advert and I'm supposed to
say this but I genuinely believe it's
the best tool I've seen for doing really
immersive simple but high quality
production virtual events you know I
never really usually pick the chocolate
flavored heels my favorite are the
banana flavor I love The Salted Caramel
flavor but recently I think I in part
blame Jack in my team who's obsessed
with the chocolate flavor heals I've
started drinking the chocolate flavor
heels for the first time and I
absolutely love them my life means that
I sometimes disregard my diet and it's
funny that's part of the reason why I've
had a lot of guests on this podcast
recently that talk about diet and health
and those kinds of things because I am
trying to make an active effort to be
more healthy to lose a little bit of
weight as well but to be more healthy
and the role that heal plays in my life
is it means that in those moments where
sometimes I might reach for
you know junk Foods
having an option that is nutritionally
complete that is high in fiber that is
incredibly high in protein that has all
the vitamins and minerals that my body
needs within Arm's Reach that I can
consume on the go is where he always
been a game changer for me
[Music]
you got to the end of this podcast
whenever someone gets to the end of this
podcast I feel like I owe them a greater
debt of gratitude because that means you
listen to the whole thing and hopefully
that suggests that you enjoyed it if you
are at the end and you enjoyed this
podcast could you do me a little bit of
a favor and hit that subscribe button
that's one of the clearest indicators we
have that this episode was a good
episode and we look at that on all of
the episodes to see which episodes
generated the most subscribers
thank you so much and I'll see you again
next time